Release k6 v0.30.0 (#1809)
loadimpact/k6: release notes/v0.30.0.md

k6 v0.30.0 is here! :tada: It was a bit of a slow after-holiday release, but it still packs a few major new features and improvements that users have been requesting for a long time!

## New features

### Shared memory read-only arrays between VUs ([#1739](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1739))

k6 has long had an issue with the handling of big data files with test fixtures. For example, if you have a huge `users.json` file with test users for your application:
```js
[
  {"username": "user1", "password": "password1", "other": "some-long-data-....-1"},
  {"username": "user2", "password": "password2", "other": "some-long-data-....-2"},
  // ... ~1 million more users or more... :D
  {"username": "user999999", "password": "password999999", "other": "some-long-data-....-999999"}
]
```

> If you just use `JSON.parse(open('users.json'))` in your script, then every VU will have a copy of the whole huge data set. Every VU in k6 is a separate JavaScript runtime, so there wasn't a thread-safe way to share data between them. Until now, that is!

Reviewer: Technically there wasn't "a way" to share data ... even non-thread-safe-ly;P . So maybe just drop the `thread-safe` part?

Author: There was, with the setup data, until we saw the data races and fixed it :smile: I'd prefer to leave thread-safe, to emphasize that a special solution was actually needed

We've added a new built-in `SharedArray` object in the new `k6/data` module that allows VUs to share read-only data:
```js
import { SharedArray } from 'k6/data';
import { sleep } from 'k6';
import http from 'k6/http';

let users = new SharedArray('someName', function () {
    // This function will be called only once, in the first init context
    // execution. Every other VU will just get a memory-safe read-only reference

>     // to the already opened data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // to the already returned data.
```

Author: not sure your suggestion makes it clearer, how about "already loaded data"?

Author: Resolved by https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1809/commits/9b61b1bce833dfbbd61f2606860ca7f9831f6c42?

    console.log('Loading users.json, this happens only once...');
    // You are not restricted to JSON, you can do anything - parse a CSV or XML
    // file, generate random data, etc. - as long as you return an array.
    return JSON.parse(open('users.json'));
});

export let options = { vus: 10, duration: '30s' };
export default function () {
    let randomUserID = Math.floor(Math.random() * users.length);

>     let user = users[randomUserID]; // alternativaly, we can also use __VU and/or __ITER

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    let user = users[randomUserID]; // alternatively, we can also use __VU and/or __ITER
```

Author: Resolved by https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1809/commits/78875f72a82841ecb179455f9c891c87526a5424

    console.log(`VU ${__VU} is running iteration ${__ITER} with user ${user.username}...`);
    http.post('https://httpbin.test.k6.io/post', JSON.stringify(user));

>     sleep(Math.random() * 2); // or, better yet, use arribal-rate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    sleep(Math.random() * 2); // or, better yet, use arrival-rate
```
also ... maybe just use arrival rate ?

Author: that was my initial idea, but it makes the script longer and takes a bit of focus away from the actual feature

Author: resolved by https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1809/commits/78875f72a82841ecb179455f9c891c87526a5424?

>     sleep(Math.random() * 2); // or, better yet, use arribal-rate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    sleep(Math.random() * 2); // or, better yet, use arrival-rate
```

Author: Resolved by https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1809/commits/78875f72a82841ecb179455f9c891c87526a5424

}
```

> Notice how `Loading users.json` is logged only once, but each VU uses the `users` variable like a normal JS array. The data is read only once and we have just a single copy of the huge array in memory! Behind the scenes, k6 uses a JS [`Proxy`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Proxy) to transparently copy only the row each VU requests in `users[randomUserID]` to it. This on-demand copying is a bit inefficient, but it's still leagues better than having a copy of the huge array in every VU! And you can avoid the copying in every iteration by pinning the data used by every VU and having `let user = users[randomUserID]` in the [init context](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/test-life-cycle)!

Reviewer: Can we get an ascinema recording?

Author: hmm not sure it's a good idea to do that in the release notes

> Notice how `Loading users.json` is logged only once, but each VU uses the `users` variable like a normal JS array. The data is read only once and we have just a single copy of the huge array in memory! Behind the scenes, k6 uses a JS [`Proxy`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Proxy) to transparently copy only the row each VU requests in `users[randomUserID]` to it. This on-demand copying is a bit inefficient, but it's still leagues better than having a copy of the huge array in every VU! And you can avoid the copying in every iteration by pinning the data used by every VU and having `let user = users[randomUserID]` in the [init context](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/test-life-cycle)!

Reviewer 2: Should we link to that memory/CPU benchmark that @MStoykov did here? It would be good to give some numbers to give an idea of the performance improvement.

Author: can you point me towards the benchmark? I can't seem to find it

Reviewer 2: Found it in #1739: https://gist.github.com/MStoykov/ea62b0d16dc21261779f46db0fe8bd53

Author: hmm a bit contrived and not showing much benefit - I'll see if I can repeat it with a bigger array later, but in any case, not sure if we can give any benchmark results that are representative, since every case would be different.

Reviewer 2: OK, I would've preferred to see even percentage ranges, but you're right that it will depend on the use case.

> And yes, you can have multiple `SharedArray` objects in the same script, just make sure to give them unique names - this is what `someName` in the script above was for. Because VUs are independent JS runtimes, we need some way to differentiate between the different shared memory objects, so we require them to have unique names. These names are also the IDs that any [xk6](https://github.com/k6io/xk6) extensions would need to use to access them.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence is a bit confusing. Why mention xk6 here at all?

Author: To give some more exposure to xk6 and for SEO :rofl: But also because this feature can be useful to any xk6 plugin authors - both for accessing `SharedArrays`, but also for implementing something similar to it, see https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/blob/45fff81b0b3af8d174c960450d16f5c4431ef9a4/js/common/initenv.go#L82-L84

Reviewer 2: Hhmm seems out of place to me, since we'd have to expand on what you mean, and that's too much detail for the release notes. But OK.

> This works both locally and in the cloud. We advise everyone that deals with huge data files to wrap them in a `SharedArray` and give this new feature a try. The required script changes should be minimal, while the benefits should be significant. Hopefully, we can finally consider one of the biggest blockers k6 users have had for a long time solved! :tada:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This works both locally and in the cloud. We advise everyone who deals with large data files to wrap them in a `SharedArray` and give this new feature a try. The required script changes should be minimal, while the benefits should be significant. Hopefully, we can finally consider one of the biggest blockers k6 users have had for a long time solved! :tada:
```

Author: Resolved by https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1809/commits/78875f72a82841ecb179455f9c891c87526a5424

> This works both locally and in the cloud. We advise everyone that deals with huge data files to wrap them in a `SharedArray` and give this new feature a try. The required script changes should be minimal, while the benefits should be significant. Hopefully, we can finally consider one of the biggest blockers k6 users have had for a long time solved! :tada:

Reviewer: I vote for having the required changes (with a few examples) spelled out in the docs and that being linked from here. This will at least give us something to link to whenever people ask what "wrap them in a `SharedArray`" means.

Author: :+1: for that, we should include it in the docs PR after we release

> This works both locally and in the cloud. We advise everyone that deals with huge data files to wrap them in a `SharedArray` and give this new feature a try. The required script changes should be minimal, while the benefits should be significant. Hopefully, we can finally consider one of the biggest blockers k6 users have had for a long time solved! :tada:

Reviewer 3: I think it makes sense to be explicit here. I'm suggesting a change from `benefits` to `memory decrease` 

```suggestion
This works both locally and in the cloud. We advise everyone that deals with huge data files to wrap them in a `SharedArray` and give this new feature a try. The required script changes should be minimal, while the memory usage should be significantly lower. Hopefully, we can finally consider one of the biggest blockers k6 users have had for a long time solved! :tada:
```

Author: Resolved by https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1809/commits/78875f72a82841ecb179455f9c891c87526a5424

### Support a `handleSummary()` callback at the end of the test ([#1768](https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1768))

You can now `export` a function called `handleSummary()` and k6 will call it at the end of the test run, after even `teardown()`. `handleSummary()` will be called with a JS object containing the same information that is used to generate the end-of-test summary and `--summary-export`, and allows users to completely customize how the end-of-test summary looks like.

> Besides customizing the end-of-test CLI summary (if `handleSummary()` is exported, k6 will not print the default), you can also generate and save as files various machine-readable data formats with the same data (JSON, CVS, JUnit/xUnit/etc. XML, etc.), as well as human-readable formats like HTML. Even binary formats like PDF are not out of reach, potentially, with an appropriate JS library that works in k6! You can also send the generated reports to a remote server by making an HTTP request with them (or using any of the other protocols k6 already supports)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besides customizing the end-of-test CLI summary (if `handleSummary()` is exported, k6 will not print the default), you can also generate and save as files various machine-readable data formats with the same data (JSON, CSV, JUnit/xUnit/etc. XML, etc.), as well as human-readable formats like HTML. Even binary formats like PDF are not out of reach, potentially, with an appropriate JS library that works in k6! You can also send the generated reports to a remote server by making an HTTP request with them (or using any of the other protocols k6 already supports)!
```

Author: Resolved by https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1809/commits/78875f72a82841ecb179455f9c891c87526a5424

> Besides customizing the end-of-test CLI summary (if `handleSummary()` is exported, k6 will not print the default), you can also generate and save as files various machine-readable data formats with the same data (JSON, CVS, JUnit/xUnit/etc. XML, etc.), as well as human-readable formats like HTML. Even binary formats like PDF are not out of reach, potentially, with an appropriate JS library that works in k6! You can also send the generated reports to a remote server by making an HTTP request with them (or using any of the other protocols k6 already supports)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides customizing the end-of-test CLI summary (if `handleSummary()` is exported, k6 will not print the default), you can also generate and save to files various machine-readable data formats with the same data (JSON, CVS, JUnit/xUnit/etc. XML, etc.), as well as human-readable formats like HTML. Even binary formats like PDF are not out of reach, potentially, with an appropriate JS library that works in k6! You can also send the generated reports to a remote server by making an HTTP request with them (or using any of the other protocols k6 already supports)!
```
This just seems more natural to me ... 

But also the whole thing reads like there is built-in way to export to all of those. I think it should be reworded so that confusion is not possible. 

I think something like: "you can also generate and save data to files in both text and binary form. This does allow the creation of js helpers to generate <formats> that aren't provided by k6 natively but here is a list of community-made ones." (and the last one is obviously a link to the documentation with just the most basic of junit one that I've hacked together).

Author: resolved by https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1809/commits/78875f72a82841ecb179455f9c891c87526a5424?

> k6 expects `handleSummary()` to return a `{key1: value1, key2: value2, ...}` map. The values can be string or `ArrayBuffer` and represent the generated summary report contents. The keys should be strings and determine where the contents will be displayed or saved: `stdout` for [standard output](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams), `stderr` for standard error, or a path to a file on the system (which will be overwritten). Here's a simple example:

Reviewer: Maybe the above explanation of the possible uses and especially the listing of the formats should be after this example. Although then it will be harder for someone just skimming this to notice that they can now maybe generate their custom JSON report directly in k6. 

So maybe someone with better English than mine should try to restructure it even more :thinking:

Author: hmm this paragraph could be moved after the example, but I'd prefer the previous paragraph to stay before

Author: see if https://github.com/loadimpact/k6/pull/1809/commits/80ca8a30809819556f409fdf55e8b6a06fbbb306 is better?
